what is nihilism it's the conclusion you
arrive at
that there is nothing to be believed in
it's a critique of belief
that concludes not just with the
rejection of one belief
or any particular set of beliefs but of
all beliefs it's a critique even of you
can say the
the psychology of believing in general
very typically
someone might be raised in the catholic
church they're taught believe believe
believe
they're taught that faith and believing
are you know really important virtuous
things
and then as they get older they may be
engaged in a critique
of what it is they believe right now one
conclusion you could come to
would be to reject catholicism and
embrace protestantism i've actually met
people who did that
you know where they they lose their
faith in this particular church this
particular doctrine or creed
but they adopt another church another
doctrine another crate
however even if you're talking about
someone who rejects the belief
in jesus the belief in god or particular
principles
there's quite a separate question of
having a critique of belief as such
where you come you come to the
conclusion it's not just having
faith in these particular things that
was erroneous or wrong
i have now come to appreciate that faith
itself is bad
faith itself is a problem faith itself
is to be rejected
what i used to think of as a virtue in
believing
i now see as a as a vice as an
encumbrance
[Music]
so you know in proposing
the definition of historical nihilism
this is really a
perfect um forms of perfect symmetry
with chinese communism
what the chinese communist party teaches
today as it's as its creed
is that you must believe in history that
you must believe in historical
inevitability that you must believe that
the mistakes that were made in the past
were all for the best
because they're part of this logical
necessary inevitable
uh progress of history that they're
they're teaching people to memorize
of passing through stages of development
something like
you know evolution so the fact that tens
of millions of people starve to death
because of an error you know that's
somehow too
terrible for us to accept emotionally so
that instead we construe this new
religion
where we want to believe that wasn't
just an error that wasn't just a mistake
was for the greater good
and that the the good things we have now
are some of our product
of that mistake so something white
people might be able to
uh relate to more more easily you know
what if you had one group of people in
your society who said look the whole
experience of slavery
of enslaving specifically enslaving
black africans
and bringing them to the new world this
is just an error this is just a mistake
you know this is just terrible and
everyone would be better off today if we
hadn't done it
you know people in africa would be
better as well as people in the united
states
and europe and so on this was just wrong
and then you have another group of
people who are saying no no you can't
believe that you can't
accept that you must believe you must
believe that this was for the greater
good
that this was the right thing to do at
the time because it made sense
so this type of rationalization it's not
just chinese communists who do it
although
chinese communism is an extreme example
well
the the series of negations that i'm
interested in that you know mattered to
me personally and that i
basically preach to others they have to
do with in this sense
rejecting what people think is
meaningful in history
what people believe in in history and
i'm saying no
it's it's precisely not believing in
those things that matters it's precisely
having detachment
about those things and um you know this
is
the simplest way to describe it is say
look
atheism is just taking one step atheism
is just
rejecting a belief in god right what
nihilism is interesting is taking a much
greater second step it's not just god
it's belief itself that we're rejecting
i have a bunch of fault this is
interesting a bunch of follow-up
questions
it's just is this just kind of an
awareness that things like history
are unreliable like is that is that part
of it that if we just
you know go with what's accepted as some
piece of history
you you're kind of you know deluding
yourself potentially knowing how
unreliable history is is that connected
to what you're talking about
i think reliability is is is kind of
irrelevant
uh because we're not talking about the
ability to know
what happened but we're talking about
the way in which people
believe in things and then
assign meanings to them in their life on
the basis of that
belief right um
now trisha paytas you know uh
has recently had a scandal on youtube
because she admitted she had never heard
of the holocaust
she didn't even know that she did
nothing about this i think you might
have
heard this part of the h3h3
descent into madness so you know okay
this is just something you don't know
now that's one kind of problem which is
just ignorance right
now there are other people who fasten on
to
and believe in the events of the
holocaust to justify
one ideology or another now the ugliest
and most extreme of course would be
people like neo-nazis who take in one
direction
there are i've i've had muslim friends i
have one ex-muslim friend now a guy was
raised muslim there are certainly a lot
of people who are part of the mainstream
religion of islam
from that history and anti-semitism as a
whole other
bunch of meanings but like on a really
simple level
if you know someone who believes and
this is quite common
oh the germans did this terrible thing
to us
therefore it's okay for us to commit
these atrocities
against palestinians now you know
if you were actually justifying doing
terrible things to germans
there's already a problem here right but
you know
these people in palestine had nothing to
do with the nazis they didn't
you know they weren't working for adolf
hitler or something
in this way people really do assign
meanings to history and they believe in
them and they find justifications
for the lives they're living now they're
fine justifications for committing
atrocities doing terrible things now
they also find justifications for just
leading you know frankly mediocre lives
now you know for for whatever it is
they're doing with their life in general
people become beholden to fixed ideas
in history and some of these ideas you
know we um
we learned them in early childhood and
they may they may be very
difficult for us to wiggle our way out
of certainly you know nationalism
uh gives us a great many examples in
this in the same way
but the problem there so just to answer
your question again directly
the problem there isn't that the actual
facts are
unknowable right it's not the
uncertainty of knowing what happened in
history
it's what oh it's what you're doing with
that knowledge
afterward it's believing in it that's
the problem
so what is what is yours because you
clearly read a lot of history and stuff
what is your so
how do you get around that exactly or
what's your what's your solution to this
to this this issue with with history wow
it's an issue with history and how it's
interpreted it sounds like
yeah yeah and it's an issue with history
and and what it uh
you know what it means in your life um
okay so you know i spent about 10 years
uh studying buddhism
i'm just trying to give you an example
it's easy to understand all right
why was i the only scholar working on
buddhism
willing to talk about slavery he
buddhism also
as an historical tradition as a cult and
as a religion it was involved with slave
trading
all right uh in the area i was in in
northern thailand and
laos they bought and sold slaves
at the buddhist temple
it's not remote the buddhist temples
owned slaves okay there were there were
slaves who were the property
of the buddhist temple all right and and
even the language of ancient buddhist
scripture it's full of the word
slave again and again again the word
slaves in there all the time
okay i think i had a kind of flexibility
of mind
a kind of openness to responding
to the facts and asking questions about
them that true believers
didn't have right now i met i knew
other scholars of buddhism i knew really
just put us and you know they'd say
things very similar to what muslims will
say
in making excuses for slavery in their
religion like oh no no but but you have
to understand
that's justified for this reason like
that was good and
necessary and inevitable you can't let
yourself think
that was bad you can't let yourself
question that
you know no
i let myself think the unthinkable
i let myself question the unquestionable
all the time
so in tearing apart history
i'm finding new meanings that other
people won't
find um precisely because
i depart from this position of
radical skepticism of regarding everyone
else's beliefs and assumptions
as meaningless french people
don't want to ask the question of what
napoleon really did
in relation to slavery especially in the
island of
haiti oh no no napoleon was a great hero
he saved the revolution he stood up for
the principles of the equality of man
did he
did napoleon stand up for the principles
of the equality of man of black men
did he and people will live their whole
lives they may even read
huge books like this about napoleon and
they can never question it and they can
they can never think it through um
i sorry a really really short example
but this one you know stays with me
emotionally
there's a major monument in bangkok
thailand
that they just called the victory
monument and i asked many
learned people all these people were
university graduates they all spoke
english at that time i couldn't speak
thai i could i could ask where the
bathroom wasn't i spoke very little
and i asked them and you see this
monument almost every day it's like
it's right in the middle it's at a major
intersection in bangkok but anyway you
at least see it every week
living in bangkok and it's this big
monument and shown on the news it's a
big iconic moment
ask them what was the victory
that monument was made to come out
and of course the first thing that's
interesting is none of them knew
and many of them had literally
worshipped this monument it's not worth
describing but they they do these
different things of bowing and placing
flowers and stuff and i'm not i'm not
trying to insult them for that
but you're worshiping a monument and you
don't even know what
the historical event was and i think two
or three of the people that kind of
scratched it hasn't thought of it
like um um i guess i guess it must be
world war
ii and then i asked
did thailand win
in world war ii they didn't
they lost they lost twice um
you know i'm not gonna do it now i
actually do know what that what that
monument is is a monument to
people live with legends about
national greatness personal greatness
ethnic identity the meaning of life
they're not quite as powerful as
religious delusions like i wouldn't say
they shape people's lives to the same
extent that
belief in islam or christianity or
mormonism does
but you know in this way your life
becomes
infested with and delimited by um
your beliefs to a remarkable extent it
limits the questions you can ask it when
it limits what you can learn
uh what you're capable of accomplishing
creatively in my opinion
so it's so that going back to the
nihilism definition is it
it's something to the effect of you know
avoiding
beliefs so that you don't your your
thinking isn't rigid you're not stuck to
things that you know are not necessarily
reliable it's just kind of you still i
mean you still have like let's say
soft beliefs you know things that you
are pretty sure of but you still leave
room
for but how far do you take that like do
you believe in like an objective reality
is is it just is it is it a lack of
trust in information or is it a lack of
trust
what what is where do you think it's
like i want to hear more about this
nihilism
right but tell me more about like that
so you're you're thinking more of of uh
skepticism or cynicism because that's
about
knowledge and what can be known right
and what i'm talking about is a critique
of belief
not not of knowledge so i'm not
interested in all in the question of
does two plus two equal four
um so if you ask the question uh is
objective reality real and knowable
because that's always the tough part
it's not whether or not
things are objectively real but can you
know that they're do you really know
what color this shirt is
as if you have experience with youtube
and live stream very often you put on a
shirt that's red and it looks pink
you know they just say maybe a shallow
example but still
you know this question of are things
knowable um
this this is from my perspective quite
quite separate belief to what extent
is objective reality real and knowable
when people play baseball
right you have to draw lines on the
field
and the lines in the field have to be
visible to all parties
so you know when you hit the ball if it
is fair or foul
so you know where first base is and you
know where second place is
can you imagine playing baseball without
drawing any lines
on the field like where every player
just has to use their imagination for
where first base is oh did you make it
to first base or
or not you know some other sports you'll
say it's about football or something oh
was that a touchdown or not i don't know
he says in his subjective opinion it was
this isn't this isn't the reality we
live in we live in a reality
where most of the distinctions we rely
on
are self-evident to everyone what's
disputed is what what they mean
in what sense they matter now so with
history it's not so much what we
take from the past it's the use we make
of it in the present
the facts of the holocaust can be
established
quite simply do they justify
the current existence of the state of
israel as a theocracy
by the way not as a democracy what does
that really have to do with the
relationship between islam
and and jews in the middle east like
which has another history going back
you know more than a thousand years and
so on
okay you know but to them because they
believe in these things that's
that's as self-evident as third base
they see that those lines that they've
drawn they live within those lines they
dream in them they think in them
and so beliefs come to form their
expectations of the reality the way they
perceive reality the way they live their
lives
yeah so that's i just say it's a
critique of of the steps we take after
uh merely knowing um
simple facts and look so we're both
canadian you know to my to my knowledge
um you know it's one thing to be aware
that canada is a country built on
genocide and it's another thing to
manufacture a nationalist
myth or a british empire myth that
justifies that as something necessary
and good and
meaningful and positive to believe that
was for the greater good
that uh the native languages should go
extinct the native people should be
driven off their land and so on
right there's a step there which doesn't
it doesn't directly
rely on the mere knowledge of facts for
me
you know nihilism is a tremendously
liberating
creative positive philosophy to live
with
but it also puts all the responsibility
on you because i don't care that your
grandparents were catholic or your
grandparents were jewish
or your grandparents were mohawk first
nations people right
it's all it's all on you it's your blank
canvas it's your life
and then it's it's your responsibility
and you can squander it you can just
play video games you can do nothing
right
or you can just try to mindlessly
imitate what your grandparents
did before believe the same things they
believe walk in their footsteps
you can right but then there's this
radically different possibility um
of something better of something worse
of something new
of something unknown but something
that's yours
right your painting your sculpture your
knowledge your wisdom your ignorance
your life and that's the sense in which
nihilism is going to beat
every other philosophy every other
religion every time because no other
philosophy is really yours
[Music]